[[Language Code: en]]

JAPAN
/
Media
AI poses threat to journalism in Japan, news association chair says
The Asahi, along with the Nikkei and the Yomiuri Shimbun, filed a lawsuit with the Tokyo District Court against Perplexity in August.
|
Getty images
By
Elizabeth Beattie
Staff writer
SHARE/SAVE
X
Facebook
LinkedIn
Reddit
Bluesky
Threads
Email
Print
Bookmark story
Copy link
Nov 14, 2025
Generative artificial intelligence poses a threat to journalistic integrity and the business of journalism, said the chair of the prominent Asahi Shimbun, one of the Japanese media outlets suing U.S. startup Perplexity AI over copyright infringement.
“Journalism should not tolerate freeloading,” said Shiro Nakamura, who is also the chair of the Japan Newspaper Publishers & Editors Association (Nihon Shinbun Kyokai, or NSK), during a news conference at the Foreign Correspondents’ Club of Japan on Friday.
Publishers around the world have been sounding the alarm over copyright infringement on platforms that use generative AI. Nakamura said Japan’s publishers across the board were concerned about the impact generative AI is having on the news business.
In a time of both misinformation and too much information,
quality journalism is more crucial than ever.
By subscribing, you can help us get the story right.
SUBSCRIBE NOW
With your current subscription plan you can comment on stories. However, before writing your first comment, please create a display name
            in the Profile section of
your subscriber account page.
Your subscription plan doesn't allow commenting. To learn more see our
FAQ
WHAT’S TRENDING
Editors' Picks
Japan builds up ‘missile archipelago’ near Taiwan to counter China
China aircraft carrier flotilla headed home, one week after Japan radar incident
GPS watch of hiker killed in Hokkaido bear attack shows last movements
Ski resort acknowledges reports of bear sightings, as predator tops kanji pick
China holds low-key Nanking Massacre memorial despite Japan tensions
J-pop found new ways to diversify in 2025
Calling AI ‘a gift from God,’ Catholic bishops draft usage guidelines for Asia
A movie buff in Jimbocho bets on independent cinema in a big way
U.S. may require tourists to disclose social media history to customs
A deep dive into Japanese comfort food
Our Planet
At Osaka Expo, gas giants promote a greener future. But is it a lot of hot air?
By
Joel Tansey
Podcast
Kabukicho: Tokyo’s ‘stadium of desire’
Longform
In the company of rats: Tokyo's growing rodent problem
By
Alex K.T. Martin
SUSTAINABLE JAPAN
Japan agency aims for both decarbonization, growth
SPECIAL SUPPLEMENTS
Sponsored contents planned and edited by JT Media Enterprise Division.
広告出稿に関するおといあわせはこちらまで
Read more
SUPPLEMENTS BINDER
Bridges by SMS
Global Insight
GMI Post
World Eye Reports
Latest News
Verdict set for case of Hong Kong tycoon and democratic firebrand Jimmy Lai
22 mins ago
Ukraine drops NATO goal as peace talks in Berlin extend into second day
2 hours ago
Gunmen kill 11 at Australia's Bondi Beach Jewish holiday event
2 hours ago
Syria, coalition forces chasing IS 'sleeper cells' after attack on U.S. troops: official
2 hours ago
Hanukkah security ramped up around the world after Bondi shootings
2 hours ago